---
layout: post
published: false
title: Socrates vs Sin
date: '2016-10-27'
author: Paulos Diametros
---

### Background

There is an ancient dilemma in ethical philosophy which has persisted to this day, and wormed its way into the language and politics of American racism. It can be characterized as the result of two competing and deeply-ingrained interpretive frameworks, corresponding more or less to the Socratic and Christian understandings of *wrong action*:

------------

#### Socrates
No person *knowingly* does wrong; true knowledge that something is wrong precludes any interest in it. All wrong actions are fundamentally failures of *reason* (errors or mistakes), which stem from a basic *ignorance* of the good.

This framework emphasizes **reasoning** as the means of moral reform; it calls on the wrongdoer to **examine** their error.

--------------

#### Christianity
We are all in sin, and sinning is a matter of *knowingly doing wrong*, or else failing to do what one knows to be right. All wrong actions are fundamentally failures of the *will* (decisions or indecisions), which stem from a deliberate *rejection* of the good.

This framework emphasizes **accountability** as the means of moral reform; it calls on the wrongdoer to **repent**. <!--more-->

--------------

This is, of course, a simple summary of two very long and convoluted traditions. More can be (and has been) said on either side, but for the sake of expediency, I invite you to consider them as laid out.

In their barest form, these ethical frameworks are *incompatible* with one another, set apart by a fundamental disagreement on the role of knowledge in wrong action. One cannot endorse them both at once, and---going by the principle of non-contradiction---neither can one employ their dictates simultaneously. One might use each of them *in turn* to address a single situation, but at some point one must make the transition, from reasoning to accountability or vice versa.  

So how do we choose which framework to adopt? We cannot even *ask* which is "better" without accepting some rules for determining value, thereby committing ourselves to a prior interpretive scheme. We are always already occupying one or the other. Without recourse to an impartial frame of negotiation, and with each framework, naturally enough, interpreting itself more favorably than the other, their disagreement seems *intractable.* So rather weigh them against each other, I want to examine the dynamic that they create and explore how it affects our concrete attempts to address injustice.

### The Problem

We can find this dynamic underlying many of Ta-Nehisi Coates's concerns in *Between the World and Me*. Are racists aware of their racism as such? Do they permit and perpetuate racial injustice because they have self-consciously embraced it, or are they simply ignorant? I see these questions of racism as extentions of the broader questions of *wrong action* that the Socratic and Christian frameworks raise. The dilemma likewise concerns how to understand racial injustice, and how to approach the task moral reform.

I would like to focus on one of Coates's stories in particular, which considers this issue in a very self-conscious way. In the story, he has just taken his four-year-old son to see *Howl's Moving Castle* at a movie theater in the Upper West Side. Coming out, his son lingers at the bottom of a crowded escalator a little too long, until a white woman shoves him from behind: "Come on!" Coates confronts her---"hot with all of the moment and all of my history" (p.94)---but the crowd sides with the woman. Tensions escalate and the story culminates in a white man telling Coates, "I could have you arrested!"

Coates lingers on this story longer than usual, noting how this threat of arrest fits into a history of white claims over the black body. But his most lenghty (and for our purposes, his most relevant) discussion concerns how he might have communicated this to the woman that pushed his son. He wants to explain the context of her actions, to reason with her Socratically, but anticipates failure:

>Had I informed this woman that when she pushed my son, she was acting according to a tradition that held black bodies as lesser, her response would likely have been, "I am not racist." Or maybe not. But my experience in this world has been that the people who believe themselves to be white are obsessed with the politics of personal exoneration. And the word racist, to them, conjures, if not a tobacco-spitting oaf, then something just as fantastic---an orc, troll, or gorgon (97).

Here, we see a way in which, one could say, the Christian framework turns to thwart the proper functioning of the Socratic: we open with the Socratic, but the wrong-doer receives the Christian---an accusation that they deliberately harbor contempt---and responds accordingly. I believe Coates is right in suspecting this kind of discourse to be unproductive.

This pattern is a general one, though it seems especially common in racially-charged encounters because of the history of these "politics of personal exoneration." Coates lists examples that span the entire twentieth century, from Michael Richards to Strom Thurmond to the segregationists of Levittown, PA. In each case, white Americans, whose actions clearly fit the structure and function of white supremacy, manage to ward off any such associations by maintaining their innocent intentions. The force of this is not in *refuting* a claim---for these people's *intentions* had not been called into question---but in refuting what is *not* claimed and thereby shifting to a framework in which the original claim makes no sense.

In response to the Socratic, the Christian claims innocence: "I'm not racist." It response to the Christian, the Socratic claims *ignorance*: "*that's* not racist." Coates does not give a concrete example of this latter dynamic, but we see it frequently enough in the real world. One can think of various convenient cases of color-blindness, and how they function to derail demands for accountability. The Socratic undermines the Christian by claiming that "this is not a race issue," that the *real* issue is something else: black-on-black crime, or perhaps "freedom of speech."

The potential for wrongdoers to shift and slide between frameworks at will, so as to ellude the moral friction of each in turn, presents a real problem for the possibility of moral reform. Is there a way to address injustice without finding ones efforts subverted in this way? Each framework has an answer, which I would now like to present in turn---as formulated in the context of American racism, and specifically in response to Coates's problem of the woman at the theater.

### In Favor of the Socratic

The answer given by the Socratic framework is, I would say, the more prominent position among politically-conscious young people today. On this view, the plausibility of the Christian framework---the idea that wrong acts are inherently bound up with knowledge or (what amounts to the same) intention---is the only reason that one can say "I'm not racist" with any kind of authority. By locating the criterion for injustice in the heart of the perpetrator, the Christian framework actually grants them *privileged access* to it. Without an omniscient God to peer into one's soul, this move subjects any claims against perpetrators to an unreasonable and, frankly, insurmountable doubt, since---as Coates warns his son---"there was no golden era when evildoers did their business and loudly proclaimed it as such" (p.98).

Accordingly, we can salvage our talk of racism from the unspeakable realm of orcs and gorgons by focusing on concrete actions and regarding any recourse to intention as a distraction. Proponents of this view might hold that, actually, *all* white people are racist, while amending racism to mean "unconsciously participating in systems that oppress people of color." By emphasizing the way that people's actions fit into historical patterns and affect current structures of power, they endeavor to shift popular consciousness from the impossible ideal of personal or *intentional* racism to the concrete structures of *systemic* racism.[^1](See [this article](https://www.thenation.com/article/effects-ignoring-systemic-racism/) for an explicite account of this agenda, and for a good example of the Socratic's popularity among a certain progressive readership. The Christian makes a brief appearance only in the last two sentences, which make an ethical call on the reader and describe an activity of "ignoring" systemic racism instead of a passive state of "ignorance.")

Now, it may be the case that wrong actions always involve *some* sort of knowledge or awareness; after all, one needs to have a certain sense of what one is doing in order to competently do it. We can see this kind of knowledge at play in Coates' account of the woman at the theater:

>There was my sense that this woman was pulling rank. I knew, for instance, that she would not have pushed a black child out on my part of Flatbush, because she would be afraid there and would sense, if not know, that there would be a penalty for such an action (94).

One might read this and object that this woman's very act of "pulling rank" *demonstrates* an awareness of that rank. Since, in this context, that rank is constituted by skin color, does that mean that this woman is already aware of her racism? This would seem contradict the Socratic claim that no one knowingly does wrong---and its corallary, that racism is a matter of ignorance; that no racist knowingly embraces racism.

It is worth emphasizing that when the Socratic denies the possibility of knowingly or intentionally doing wrong, it has in mind a very particular kind of knowledge. The person that holds such *Socratic knowledge* must be both aware of it and able to articulate it,[^2](Consider Socrates' many interlocutors who claim to know the meaning of virtue, yet fail to articulate it without self-contradiction. Consider also the slave boy of the [*Meno*](http://www.gutenberg.org/files/1643/1643-h/1643-h.htm), who is perfectly able to articulate the Pythagorean Theorem, yet was not aware of this ability prior to Socrates' intervention. In a certain sense, Socrates does take this boy's innate capacity as proof of his mathematical knowledge. Yet if we are all like this boy---knowing everything there is to know through the eternal transmigration of our souls---then this unrecollected knowledge cannot satisfy the condition of "knowingly doing wrong." Proper Socratic knowledge must be forged in the dialectic.) which is not the case with the woman at the theater. Her sensing-if-not-knowing is a very unrefined kind of knowledge, which the Socratic can still admit of. Indeed, Socrates has a name for it: *unrecollected* knowledge; knowledge that we have forgotten that we know.

Far from discrediting the Socratic framework, unrecollected knowledge is central to its method of moral reform. Unlike intention, it is not hidden in one's heart, but is made plain in the implications of one's beliefs and actions. Rather than *lecture* his interlocutors, Socrates need only *articulate* what they already know. They may not particularly *like* to have their views clarified in this way, but if Socrates does his job well, then they should recognize these views as their own. If they do---if they assent, admitting that yes indeed, Socrates has understood them well---then they have already forfeited the authority of Christian interiority, and so retired from the politics of self-exoneration. 

It is tempting, faced simultaneously with repugnant beliefs and the believer's vulnerability, to make for the Christian and level an accusation. Yet if one holds fast to the Socratic, then one continues to depersonalize the question of racism, moving from this interlocutor's underlying assumptions to the structural realities that those depend on. White Americans must already sense (if they do not yet *know*) the pervasive fabric of systemic racism (else they would not be so good at playing it to their advantage) and this is precisely what one endeavors to remind them of. If a little Socratic interrogation could bring the woman at the theater to admit that "no, I would not have pushed a black child out on your part of Flatbush," then it's a short step to the real issue: "Yes, I suppose that I 'outrank' Coates in the Upper West Side. Yes, I suppose this is what allows me to push his son with impunity. Yes, this 'rank' is only afforded to me by a long history of racial injustice, and by exercising it, I am perpetuating that injustice."

We might worry that, even confronted such a weighty recollection, what's to stop this woman from simply accepting it? Have we not also shown her that, as a white person, perpetuating this systemic injustice is in her own self-interest?

In the *Gorgias*, Socrates argues that this would not be a rational response, since we all consider it worse to commit an injustice than to suffer one. This echoes Coates' pessimistic line that evildoers never proclaim their evil, yet that basic interest in self-exoneration, which previously caused us such trouble, here becomes a great moral advantage. If the woman at the theater can be brought to acknowledge the systemic *injustice* inherent in her actions, we can expect her to reject it, even at great cost to herself. Socrates' reasoning here can get quite technical, so I will simply suggest that it bears out in experience: the closest contemporary phenomenon to a shameless embrace of racism---the alt-right movement---still needs to *justify* itself, hence the practice of "red-pilling," casting people of color as the oppressors and white Americans as oppressed.[^3](White supremacy, like all systems of hate, is not coherent by itself. It is always parasitic upon other ideologies, appropriating their values---be they family and country or progress and equality---to its own purposes. Such values also provide a fitting smokescreen, since white supremacy must obscure its own activity in order to properly operate. The more obvious it becomes, the more it betrays its own absence. There is nothing to it.)

It is *this* that must be challenged; the rest will follow. And critical to challenging it is recognizing it for what it is---ignorance, a set of false beliefs---and doing away with the misleading and unproductive notion of a deeper intention or malice.

### In Favor of the Christian

We have just characterized the Christian framework as naive in the face of history, hoping against all precedent that evildoers might acknowledge their evil. The Christian similarly regards the Socratic as naive, but with respect to human nature. "Of course evildoers have never *proclaimed* themselves as such," it admits, "but this does not mean that they have not understood (or, at least, willfully *mis*understood) the nature of their actions."

Though the Socratic speaks of sin as a kind of malice or contempt (and perhaps this is the only alternative to ignorance that the Socratic can conceive of), what the Christian framework intends is something much more passive. It starts with what Augustine calls "willful ignorance:"

>It is one thing to be ignorant, and another thing to be unwilling to know. For the will is at fault in the case of the man of whom it is said, "He is not inclined to understand, so as to do good" (*On Grace and Free Will*, chpt. V).

Coates calls those "not inclined to understand" the *Dreamers*, who both cultivate the American myth and enjoy its [strange] fruit. Theirs is not the simple ignorance of those watching the shadows in Plato's cave, but the willful ignorance of those who *do* understand the distinction between illusion and reality and yet do not *care*. The Christian framework contends that the vast majority of human ignorance is of this sort. It does not arise through a firm commitment to the truth (tragically led astray by false beliefs), but through *convenience*---that is, a *negative commitment*, a total lack of commitment.[^4](This explains the parasitic nature of white supremacy: it is first and foremost an absence (a *lack* of commitment) and absence requires something to be absent from. It needs a positive system of values with respect to which it can manifest. These values can take many forms, but fundamental to all of them (and to the possibility of maintaining positive values at all) is the commitment to truth and the good. This is why we have characterized white supremacy's lack as one with respect to truth: it is the most basic and general form of sin---the sin *state*---on which all particular sins are then founded.)

We can think of this negative commitment as a kind of drowsiness or lethargy, which is necessary but insufficient for dreaming, just as willful ignorance is necessary but insufficient for sin. To get sin, we need an *opportunity* for wakefulness, which the sinner then turns down, like a half-awake person squinting and shielding her eyes from sunlight. Here,  the will transitions from weakness to *defiance*. The dreamer *refuses* to wake up, even as she begins to understand that she *is* waking up. This is because the morning presents itself to the dreamer as a kind of death, rendering her dream's narrative incoherent and mocking the passion with which she pursued its dream-goods. It natural for the dreamer to curse the morning for ending her dream-pursuits prematurely.[^5](Of course, morning's reflection finds this behavior completely absurd. The dream-narrative has no end of its own. It leads the dreamer on a merry chase as stories follow from stories, each task forgotten before it can be completed. The awakened person can make no sense of it---though most, with no further reflection, move right on with their waking narrative and real-life tasks, which surely must have an end in sight!)

Coates seems to recognize this kind of behavior in the Dreamers, as he practically accuses them of dreaming lucidly:

>The mettle that it takes to look away from the horror of our prison system, from police forces transformed into armies, from the long war against the black body, is not forged overnight. This is the practiced habit of jabbing out one’s eyes and forgetting the work of one’s hands (p.98).

Such "practiced habits" are precisely why the Christian framework insists on the role of *knowledge* in sin and injustice. Insofar as the will is active and defiant, it is impossible to will ignorance completely; the very act of "jabbing out one's eyes" betrays an awareness of what one might otherwise see. Yet since most ignorance *is* of the willful sort, the Christian considers what the Socratic called "unrecollected knowledge" to be something more like a *repressed memory*. It jumps at every opportunity to re-emerge and is only kept at bay through willful intervention (even if that intervention itself is later obscured and forgotten). Slowly, the Dreamers' noncommittal dreaming becomes less convenient and approaches the realm of deliberate, self-conscious activity. They must plan and stage their forgetting in advance to be ready when the memory next emerges. But this transition is so subtle that, in most cases, the old habits forged by convenience are sufficient to carry one though it (and into sin) without fuss or fanfare.

In light of all of this, the Christian framework regards the Socratic program of rational deliberation as fundamentally misguided. While the Socratic endeavors to remind the Dreamers of their unrecollected knowledge of systemic racism, the Dreamers' entire project has anticipated this, and slipping into the Christian interpretive frame is but one way of preserving their ignorance. The woman at the theater is not closed off to Coates's imagined dialogue because she (innocently enough) *confuses* an explanation with an accusation, but because she *chooses* to take it this way. Her confusion is more convenient than recollecting that uncomfortable knowledge, hidden behind her "pulling rank," which threatens to throw her actions and whole way of life into question.

Until this changes---until the Dreamers take *responsibility* for their dreaming---reasoning with them is actually impossible. They may nod and make noises like they understand, but this is ultimately a false act. It is no different from how they imitate the noises and movements of the oppressed: appropriating the language of discrimination and silencing, or demanding safe spaces to dream in. We are lucky if, convinced that it is making progress reasoning with the Dreamers, the Socratic merely accomplishes nothing. Too often, however, it falls for the false act and---blind to the willful element of their dreaming---accepts their account of white supremacy as a faceless force of nature, from which no agents emerge accountable.[^6](I might suggest that the Socratic risks this when it loses a healthy sense of *irony*. Irony is the only thing allowing Socrates to practice his method without being actually deceived by his interlocutors.) Coates points out how this brand of Socratic fatalism makes undermines accountability:

>The earthquake cannot be subpoenaed. The typhoon will not bend under indictment. They sent the killer of Prince Jones back to his work, because he was not a killer at all. He was a force of nature, the helpless agent of our world’s laws (p.83).

In this way, denying the role of intention in systemic racism proves at least as as problematic as insisting on it. It is through this denial that lynchings come to be carried out by "persons unknown" and *outrageous* acts become mere *tragedies*.

So, prior to dialogue, the Christian framework calls on the Dreamers to *repent*. They *know* what they do, and the only hope is to appeal to this knowledge---to demand that they *account* for their decision to do wrong. This is the foundation of accountability: establishing or discerning a collective and public account of proper action, and holding individuals *to* that account.

While I think there is good reason to expect that a proper system of accountability will effect moral reform through general deterrence, there is something of a Catch-22 involved in setting one up. Such a system presuposes a public that is *willing* to hold people to count for their actions and is *willing* to acknowledge those actions *as* wrong. It depends, that is on a certain portion of the Dreamers waking up, and the Christian framework makes no promises here. There is always hope, to be sure, that a call to account might break through their charade and strike at their guilty heart, but alas, there is only so much that one can do for another in matters of the will. At the end of the day, the Christian framework demands a great deal from the individual wrongdoer, placing the onus of reform squarely on his shoulders. One can present the Dreamers with a choice---in the form of a call to "wake up!"---but one cannot make that choice for them. At a certain point, one can only pray.

### Synthesis

The careful reader may have already noticed a striking similarity between the Christian's hands-off approach to moral reform and what the Socratic initially took issue with: the way that the Christian grants wrongdoers impunity by founding their moral bearing on private criteria. Meanwhile, the Christian accuses the Socratic of *inviting* wrongdoers to slip across frameworks by blinding itself to the workings of the will---a blindness that the Socratic only ever adopted as an antidote to the politics of self-exoneration. So, one method of moral reform proves the bane of another. The Christian framework, in its extreme, reduces racism to a *character trait*, while at the extremity of the Socratic we have the myth of racism as a natural phenomenon.

Between such extremes, we might hope to stake out a reasonable middle ground. Surely, both frameworks are always correct to some measure! Each case is mixed: there are *some* instances in which ignorance prevails, and others where the Christian is more appropriate. Yet without its own coherent theory of wrong action, this middle ground is unstable; little more than a no-man's-land in the border conflict between the Christian and the Socratic. It is precisely through the ambiguity of these *instances*---the open question as to which framework is to be adopted at which time---that wrongdoers are able to shift from one to the other. This compromise position cannot even recognize such phenomenon as a problem (for it has already assumed its own ignorance on the affair), and so the problem of the woman at the theater remains unsolved.

That said, I do believe there is a positive way of synthesizing these frameworks to our advantage, even if it is not entirely even-handed. For this, I want to turn to S&#248;ren Kierkegaard, to whom I am deeply indebted. His *Philosophical Fragments* first distinguished the Socratic and Christian frameworks in the manner we have been exploring, and I have already borrowed heavily from it in the preceding sections. Yet, while its proposed aim is to set these frameworks apart into an either/or relationship of opposition, the *Fragments* also makes room for the Socratic to play a diminished role it its otherwise-Christian take on the nature of evil and the *telos* of moral and spiritual development.  

The structure looks roughly like this: sin is, as we have said, a state of untruth, of actively rejecting the truth, and this is a choice, not a confusion. Truth (reason and Socratic dialogue) cannot be used to rectify untruth, since it has already been rejected; one needs repentance and the grace of the absurd. Yet for Kierkegaard, it *can* be used to articulate or *draw attention to* one's sin state---that is, by showing the sinner that they *are* actively rejecting the truth---making impossible the excuse of innocence in the manner of our Lord:

>"If I had not come and spoken unto them, they would not have sin; but now they have no excuse for their sin" (John 15:22).

[[quote from fragments]]

[[This is the best that a mere human can do for another, and for Kierkegaard, Socrates is the best of all mere humans.]]

In emphasizing the transformative limits of rational discourse, Kierkegaard finds himself in good company. The possibility of failed discourse was also a central concern for Plato, and we can see it embodied in two of his most infamous characters: Callicles of the *Gorgias* and Thrasymachus of the *Republic*. When Socrates points out contradictions in their views, they embrace them, taking the opportunity to deride his method as childish and unrealistic. In both cases, Socrates and his interlocutors resolve nothing. Rather than arriving together at *aporia*, they part in frustration and confusion. And yet the failure does not seem to be on Socrates' part, but rather on his interlocutors. Plato characterizes their rejection of rational discourse as a rejection of *love*. They do not proceed to dialogue from a desire to learn and understand, but rather from a desire to *refute*---and perhaps, to *exonerate* themselves from Socrates' accusations.

Kierkegaard accepts the basic Christian premise that this failure of dialogue is fundamentally the result of sin, and that maintaining oneself in sin requires a constant and deliberate application of effort, which one cannot be entirely unaware of. Even if the Dreamers *succeed* in their ritual repression---even if they *actually forget* the reality of systemic racism---they must then forget this very act of forgetting, and so on.[^7](This appears to be the reason that true, psychological repression is both so taxing and so unstable. There is preserved a direct link between one's present activity and the repressed memory; this is why the memory threatens to come surging back into awareness at the slightest provocation. True forgetting may be possible, but only through the weakening of the will. Those things that we most want to forget, we never quite can.) The present activity is never quite hidden, and it in it, their knowledge is apparent. By engaging the Dreamers in rational discourse, one forces their will again into action. Even if it labors against the truth, *this itself* reveals the truth---this itself *is* a kind of recollection. One forces them to confront their sin by forcing them to *perform* it in discourse, in the manner of the Lord:

>"If I had not come and spoken unto them, they would not have sin; but now they have no excuse for their sin" (John 15:22).

For Kierkegaard, as for Socrates, rational discourse is *necessary* for moral reform. It is not sufficient, as no amount of reason can bring about a reversal of the will, but it is needed in order to *expose* the will as the driver of wrong action. It is necessary for the Christian's method of repentance, and---most interesting for our purposes---it is *prior* to it. Whereas the Christian framework insisted on accountability as the necessary condition for true dialogue, Kierkegaard tells us that dialogue precedes any possibility of authentic accountability. It is the only means of calling another to attend to their will.

What does this mean for our purposes? In some ways, it allows us to have our cake and eat it, with respect to the two frameworks. By accepting the Christian *account* of racism, which calls attention to the role of the will, I think we are more prepared to address the issue of shifting frameworks. We have a more mature explanation of the Dreamers' dreaming and are less likely to let them off the hook. Yet by accepting a modified form of the Socratic *method*, we refuse to let the Dreamers escape into the private world of their knowledge and intentions. Kierkegaard's method also has the benefit of being agnostic about the underlying causes of a particular set of wrong acts, since one proceeds with dialogue in either case. It is not a *practical* issue whether the ignorance of the woman at the theater is willful or not. If the will is involved, then it will rise to defy reason, and make itself known through this defiance. If it is *not* involved, then reason may actually accomplish something in the way of dispelling false beliefs.

Yet the most appealing aspect of this synthesis, to me, is the way that the context of the Christian framework actually *changes* the practice of dialogue. Kierkegaard calls on us to engage with one another Socratically only *after* we have renounced the idea that our dialogue can actually save anyone. The Christian framework demands our humility; it demands that we recognize that changing another's mind is not within our power.

It may sound pessimistic, yet this expectation is often what makes real dialogue (and real love) so hard. If one understands succesful dialogue only as that which ends in agreement, then one is constantly faced with failure, perhaps even taking the goading of the Dreamers to heart: "Don't you want me to understand?" "How will I learn if you don't explain this to me?" This is an unsustainable practice. It is why Kierkegaard argues that we can only act ethically by renouncing the world-historical fruits of our actions,[^8](See especially the [*Concluding Unscientific Postscript*](https://www.amazon.com/Concluding-Unscientific-Postscript-Philosophical-Kierkegaards/dp/0691020817).) and Coates seems to suggest the same:

>History is not soley in our hands. And still you are called to struggle, not because it assures you victory but because it assures you an honorable and sane life (p.97).

Success here is not important; one does not need to convert the racist crowd. Even in the *Gorgias*, Socrates never *convinces* Callicles that he is in untruth, yet Socrates continues to engage him in dialogue so as to demonstrate his active denial of the truth. Where does he find the strength to carry on in this way, banging his head against an unyielding wall? There is an almost unfathomable love at work here: the love of one's enemy that expects nothing in return.

We are not *obligated* to love in this way; indeed, no one has ever loved another through obligation. Yet it is also good to love. Kierkegaard never wants us to forget that our *own* souls are also at stake---that we too are in sin---and loving dialogue offers the lover a way to repent. Through it, one embraces the paradox of penance: first renouncing one's power to effect change through dialogue, then engaging in dialogue by virtue of the absurd.[^9](The paradox of penance, as embodied by the merman in [*Fear and Trembling*](https://www.amazon.com/Fear-Trembling-Repetition-Kierkegaards-Writings/dp/0691020264), is, of course, to be distinguished from the paradox of faith, as embodied by Abraham. In both cases, the will is split by the absurd---the simultaneous demands of renunciation and expectation---while unified into a singular action. Yet in the case of faith, this action transcends the ethical sphere: one relates, in silence, directly to God. In the case of penance, this action *fulfills* the ethical sphere: one relates, in dialogue, directly to others. Much fuss is made of Abraham's leap beyond the ethical, yet penance is the task laid at our feet.) True dialogue also functions to disclose one's own ignorance, just as true penance discloses one's own sin (and from the perspective of the synthetic framework we have just outlined, ignorance and sin are one and the same).

### The Solution

One does not, then, *by one's own power*, reform the woman at the theater. One does not impede her as she slips from the Socratic to the Christian, even as one understands that this is a willful evasion, consistent with her decision to submit to the convenience of the Dream. The problem that she presents is not resolved by choosing the right words, for there are no words that will win her heart. One simply speaks. By means of love, one discloses oneself in dialogue; by disclosing oneself, one invites her to do the same.

-----------------

### Sources

- Augustine, [*On Grace and Free Will*](http://www.newadvent.org/fathers/1510.htm)
- Coates, [*Between the World and Me*](https://www.amazon.com/Between-World-Me-Ta-Nehisi-Coates/dp/0812993543)
- Kierkegaard, [*Philosophical Fragments*](https://www.amazon.com/Philosophical-Fragments-Johannes-Climacus-Kierkegaards/dp/0691020361)
- Plato, [*The Gorgias*](http://www.gutenberg.org/files/1672/1672-h/1672-h.htm)
- The Gospel of John, as found in the [*Jubilee Bible*](http://biblehub.com/jub/john/15.htm)